Now, lords, if God doth give successful end
to this debate that bleedeth at our doors,
we will our youth lead on to higher fields
and draw no swords but what are sanctified.
Our navy is addressed, our power collected,
our substitutes in absence well invested,
and everything lies level to our wish.
Only, we lack a little personal strength;
and pause us till these rebels, now afoot,
come underneath the yoke of government.
Of both which we doubt not but Your Majesty shall soon enjoy.
Humphrey, my son of Gloucester,
where is the prince your brother?
I think he's gone to hunt, my lord, at Windsor.
And how accompanied?
I do not know, my lord.
Is not his brother, Thomas of Clarence, with him?
No, my good lord; he is in presence here.
What would my lord and father?
Nothing but well to thee, Thomas of Clarence.
How chance thou art not with the prince thy brother?
He loves thee, and thou dost neglect him, Thomas.
Thou hast a better part in his affection
than all thy brothers.
Cherish it, my boy,
and noble offices thou mayst effect of mediation,
after I am dead,
between his greatness and thy other brethren.
Therefore omit him not.
Blunt not his love, nor lose the good advantage of His Grace
by seeming cold or careless of his will,
for he is gracious, if he be observed.
He hath a tear for pity
and a hand open as day for melting charity.
Yet notwithstanding, being incensed, he's flint,
as humorous as winter
and as sudden as flaws congealed in the spring of day.
His temper, therefore, must be well observed.
Chide him for faults, and do it reverently,
when you perceive his blood inclined to mirth.
But, being moody, give him line and scope,
till that his passions, like a whale on ground,
confound themselves with working.
Learn this, Thomas,
and thou shalt prove a shelter to thy friends,
a hoop of gold to bind thy brothers in,
that the united vessel of their blood,
mingled with venom of suggestion贸
As, force perforce, the age will pour it in贸
shall never leak, though it do work as strong
as aconitum or more rash gunpowder.
I shall observe him with all care and love.
Why art thou not at Windsor with him, Thomas?
He is not there today.
He dines in London.
And how accompanied?
Canst thou tell that?
With Poins and other his continual followers.
Most subject is the fattest soil to weeds.
And he, the noble image of my youth, is overspread with them.
Therefore my grief stretches itself beyond the hour of death.
The blood weeps from my heart when I do shape
in forms imaginary the unguided days
and rotten times that you shall look upon
when I am sleeping with my ancestors.
For when his headstrong riot hath no curb,
when rage and hot blood are his counselors,
when means and lavish manners meet together,
oh, with what wings shall his affections fly
to fronting peril and opposed decay.
My gracious lord, you look beyond him quite.
The prince but studies his companions
like a strange tongue, wherein, to learn the language.
'Tis necessary that the most immodest words
be looked upon and learnt,
which once attained, Your Highness knows,
comes to no further use but to be known and hated.
So like gross terms, the prince will in the perfectness of time
cast off his followers.
And their memory shall as a pattern or a measure live,
by which His Grace must mete the lives of others,
turning past evils to advantages.
'Tis seldom when the bee doth leave her comb
in the dead carrion.
Who's here?
Westmoreland?
Health to my sovereign,
and new happiness added to that that I am to deliver.
Prince John your son doth kiss Your Grace's hand.
Mowbray, the Bishop Scroop, Hastings, and all
are brought to the correction of your law.
There is not now a rebel's sword unsheathed,
but peace puts forth her olive everywhere.
Oh, Westmoreland, thou art a summer bird,
which ever in the haunch of winter sings
the lifting up of day.
And there's more news.
The earl Northumberland and the lord Bardolph,
with a great power of English and of Scots,
are by the shrieve of Yorkshire overthrown.
And wherefore should these good news make me sick?
Will fortune never come with both hands full,
but write her fair words still in foulest letters?
She either gives a stomach and no food.
Such are the poor in health.
Or else a feast and takes away the stomach.
Such are the rich that have abundance and enjoy it not.
I should rejoice now at this happy news.
And now my sight fails and my brain is giddy.
Oh, me.
Come near me.
Now I am much ill.
Comfort, Your Majesty.
Oh, my royal father.
My sovereign lord, cheer up yourself,
Look up.
Be patient, princes.
You do know, these fits are with His Highness very ordinary.
Stand from him.
Give him air.
He'll straight be well.
No, no, he cannot long hold out these pangs.
The incessant care and labor of his mind
hath wrought the mure that should confine it in
so thin that life looks through and will break out.
This apoplexy will certain be his end.
Softly, pray.
Who saw the duke of Clarence?
I am here, brother, full of heaviness.
How now.
Rain within doors and none abroad.
How doth the king?
Exceeding ill.
Heard he the good news yet?
Tell it him.
He altered much upon the hearing it.
If he be sick with joy, he'll recover without physic.
Not so much noise, my lords.
Sweet prince, speak low.
The king your father is disposed to sleep.
Let us withdraw into the other room.
Please it Your Grace to go along with us?
No, I will sit and watch here by the king.
Why doth the crown lie there upon his pillow,
being so troublesome a bedfellow?
Oh, polished perturbation.
Golden care.
It keeps the ports of slumber open wide
to many a watchful night.
Sleep with it now贸
yet not so sound and half so deeply sweet
as he whose brow with homely biggen bound
snores out the watch of night.
Oh, majesty,
when thou dost pinch thy bearer,
thou dost sit like a rich armor worn in heat of day
that scalds with safety.
By his gates of breath
there lies a downy feather which stirs not.
Did he suspire,
that light and weightless down perforce must move.
My gracious lord?
My father?
This sleep is sound indeed.
This is a sleep that from this golden rigol
hath divorced so many English kings.
Thy due from me is tears and heavy sorrows of the blood,
which nature, love, and filial tenderness,
shall, oh, dear Father, pay thee plenteously.
My due from thee is this imperial crown,
which, as immediate as thy place and blood,
derives itself to me.
Lo, where it sits, which God shall guard.
And put the world's whole strength into one giant arm,
it shall not force this lineal honor from me.
This from thee will I to mine leave, as 'tis left to me.
Warwick.
Gloucester and Clarence.
Doth the king call?
What would Your Majesty?
How fares my lord?
Why did you leave me here alone, my lords?
We left the prince my brother here, my liege,
who undertook to sit and watch by you.
The Prince of Wales?
Where is he?
Find him.
He is not here.
The door is open.
He is gone this way.
He came not through the chamber where we stayed.
Where is the crown?
Who took it from my pillow?
When we withdrew, my lord, we left it there.
The prince hath ta'en it hence.
Go seek him out.
Is he so hasty that he doth suppose my sleep my death?
Find him, my lord of Warwick.
Chide him hither.
This part of his conjoins with my disease
and helps to end me.
See, sons, what things you are.
How quickly nature falls into revolt
when gold becomes her object.
For this the foolish, overcareful fathers
have broke their sleep with thoughts,
their brains with care, their bones with industry.
For this they have been thoughtful to invest
their sons with arts and martial exercises.
When, like the bee,
culling from every flower the virtuous sweets,
our thighs with wax, our mouths with honey packed,
we bring it to the hive, and, like the bees,
are murdered for our pains.
This bitter taste.
But wherefore did he take away the crown?
Lo, where he comes.
Come hither to me, Harry.
Depart the chamber.
Leave us here alone.
I never thought to hear you speak again.
Thy wish was father, Harry, to that thought.
I stay too long by thee.
I weary thee.
Dost thou so hunger for mine empty chair
that thou wilt needs invest thee with my honors
before thy hour be ripe?
Oh, foolish youth.
Thou seek'st the greatness that will overwhelm thee.
Stay but a little, for my cloud of dignity
is held from falling with so weak a wind
that it will quickly drop.
My day is dim.
Thou hast stolen that which after some few hours
were thine without offence.
And at my death thou hast sealed up my expectation.
Thy life did manifest thou lovedst me not,
and thou wilt have me die assured of it.
What canst thou not forbear me half an hour?
Then get thee gone and dig my grave thyself,
and bid the merry bells ring to thine ear
that thou art crowned, not that I am dead.
Let all the tears that should bedew my hearse
be drops of balm to sanctify thy head.
Only compound me with forgotten dust.
Give that which gave thee life unto the worms.
Pluck down my officers, break my decrees,
for now a time is come to mock at form.
Harry V is crowned
Up, vanity.
Down, royal state.
All you sage counselors, hence.
And to the English court assemble now,
from every region, apes of idleness.
For the fifth Harry
from curbed license plucks the muzzle of restraint,
and the wild dog shall flesh his tooth on every innocent.
Oh, my poor kingdom, sick with civil blows.
When that my care could not withhold thy riots,
what wilt thou do when riot is thy care?
Oh, thou wilt be a wilderness again,
peopled with wolves, thy old inhabitants.
Oh, pardon me, my liege.
But for my tears, the moist impediments unto my speech,
I had forestalled this dear and deep rebuke
ere you with grief had spoke
and I had heard the course of it so far.
There is your crown,
and he that wears the crown immortally long guard it yours.
If I affect it more than as your honor and as your renown,
let me no more from this obedience rise,
which my most inward, true, and duteous spirit teacheth,
this prostrate and exterior bending.
God witness with me, when I here came in
and found no course of breath within Your Majesty,
how cold it struck my heart.
If I do feign, oh, let me in my present wildness die
and never live to show the incredulous world
the noble change that I have purposed.
Coming to look on you, thinking you dead,
and dead almost, my liege, to think you were,
I spake unto this crown as having sense
and thus upbraided it.
"The care on thee depending hath fed upon the body of my father.
"Therefore, thou best of gold art worst of gold.
"Other, less fine in carat, is more precious,
"preserving life in medicine potable.
"But thou, most fine, most honored, most renowned,
hast eat thy bearer up."
Thus, my most royal liege, accusing it,
I put it on my head,
to try with it as with an enemy
that had before my face murdered my father.
The quarrel of a true inheritor.
But if it did infect my blood with joy
or swell my thoughts to any strain of pride,
if any rebel or vain spirit of mine
did with the least affection of a welcome
give entertainment to the might of it,
let God forever keep it from my head
make me as the poorest vassal is
that doth with awe and terror kneel to it.
Oh, my son,
God put it in thy mind to take it hence
that thou mightst win the more thy father's love,
pleading so wisely in excuse of it.
Come hither, Harry.
Sit thou by my bed and hear, I think, the very latest counsel
that ever I shall breathe.
God knows, my son,
by what bypaths and indirect, crooked ways I met this crown;
and I myself know well how troublesome it sat upon my head.
To thee it shall descend with better quiet,
better opinion, better confirmation,
for all the soil of the achievement
goes with me into the earth.
It seemed in me but as an honor snatched with boisterous hand,
and I had many living
to upbraid my gain of it by their assistances,
which daily grew to quarrel and to bloodshed,
wounding supposed peace.
All these bold fears thou see'st with peril I have answered,
for all my reign hath been but as a scene acting that argument.
And now my death changes the mood.
For what in me was purchased
falls upon thee in a more fairer sort,
so thou the garland wear'st successively.
Yet, though thou stand'st more sure than I could do,
thou art not firm enough, since griefs are green.
And all my friends, which thou must make thy friends,
have but their stings and teeth newly ta'en out,
by whose fell working I was first advanced
and by whose power I well might lodge a fear
to be again displaced,
which to avoid, I cut them off,
and had a purpose now to lead out many to the Holy Land,
lest rest and lying still might make them look
too near unto my state.
Therefore, my Harry, be it thy course to busy giddy minds
with foreign quarrels.
That action, hence borne out,
may waste the memory of the former days.
More would I, but my lungs are wasted
so that strength of speech is utterly denied me.
How I came by the crown, oh, God forgive;
and grant it may with thee in true peace live.
My gracious liege,
you won it, wore it, kept it, gave it me.
Then plain and right must my possession be,
which I with more than with a common pain
'gainst all the world will rightfully maintain.
Doth any name particular
belong unto the lodging where I first did swoon?
'Tis called Jerusalem, my noble lord.
Laud be to God.
Even there my life must end.
It hath been prophesied to me many years,
I should not die but in Jerusalem,
which vainly I supposed the Holy Land.
But bear me to that chamber.
There I'll lie.
In that Jerusalem shall Harry die.
By cock and pie, sir, you shall not away tonight.
What, Davy, I say.
You must excuse me, Master Robert Shallow.
I will not excuse you; you shall not be excused.
Excuses shall not be admitted.
There is no excuse shall serve.
You shall not be excused.
Why, Davy, I贸
Here, sir.
Davy, Davy, Davy,let me see, Davy.
Let me see.
Ah, marry, William cook, bid him come hither.
Sir John, you shall not be excused.
Marry, sir, thus,
those precepts cannot be served, and, again, sir,
shall we sow the headland with wheat?
With red wheat, Davy.
But for William cook, have we no young pigeons?
Yes, sir.
Sir, here is now the smith's note
for shoeing and plough irons.
Well, let it be cast and paid.
Sir John, you shall not be excused.
Now, sir, a new link to the bucket must needs be had.
And, sir, do you mean to stop any of William's wages
about the sack he lost the other day at Hinckley fair?
A' shall answer it.
Let him cook some pigeons, Davy, a couple of short-legged hens,
some  joint of mutton,
and some, any pretty, little, tiny kickshaws;
tell William cook.
Doth the man of war stay all night, sir?
Yea, I will use him well, Davy.
A friend at court is better than a penny in purse.
And for his men, use them well,
for they are arrant knaves and will backbite.
No worse than they are backbitten,
for they have marvelous foul linen.
Well conceited, Davy.
About thy business, Davy.
Where are you, Sir John?
Come, come, come.
Off with your boots.
Give me your hand, good Master Bardolph.
By Your Worship.
I thank thee from my heart.
And welcome, my tall fellow.
Come, Sir John.
I'll follow you, Master Robert Shallow.
Bardolph.
What?
Look to our horses.
If I were sawed into quantities,
I should make four dozen of such bearded hermits' staves
as Master Shallow.
It's a wonderful thing to see the semblable coherence
of his men's spirits and his.
They, by observing of him,
do bear themselves like foolish justices.
He, by conversing with them,
is turned into a justice-like servingman.
It's certain that either wise bearing
or ignorant carriage is caught,
as men take diseases, one of another.
Therefore let men take heed of the company they keep.
I will devise matter enough out of this Shallow
to keep Prince Harry in continual laughter.
Oh, you shall see him laugh
till his face be likea wet cloak ill laid up.
Sir John.
I come, Master Shallow.